The Sugar-Cane, Book 1
Lines 205 - 217


lines 266 - 277

As art transforms the savage face of things,
And order captivates the harmonious mind;
Let not thy Blacks irregularly hoe:
But, aided by the line, consult the site
Of thy demesnes; and beautify the whole.
So when a monarch rushes to the war,
To drive invasion from his frightened realm;
Some delegated chief the frontier views,
And to each squadron, and brigade, assigns
Their order'd station; Soon the tented field
Brigade and squadron, whiten on the sight;
And fill spectators with an awful joy.

This passage establishes order as an aesthetic category, and in doing so it links two disparate aspects of the British imperial impulse: the globalization of the agriculture and military conquest. By rendering these disparate processes as the extension of an aesthetic, Grainger does more than make a simple nature-culture distinction, though that is by no means irrelevant to what he does. []

[The first five lines extend the aesthetics of order to efficient agricultural practices, and do so in a way that ....] "Art" here, despite the presence of "beautif[ication]" later, should be understood as skilled action or (especially in this case) applied knowledge rather than as "art" in the modern sense. It is significant that "art" itself is given agency over "transform[ation]" rather than the wielder of that art, particularly because the same thing happens with "order" in the next line, which "captivates" the mind rather than the mind *appreciating* order. In these cases, the means and object respectively become grammatical subjects, effectively naturalizing both; art and order are presented as things that happen and exist in themselves, without the intervention of a guiding or creating hand. This naturalization is necessary because "art" and "order" are being set up as principles to guide the intentional action to come, ideals by which willful creation will shortly be judged. Another dyad is established in the first two lines, however, between transformative action, which is associated with the world of "things," and mechanistically responsive perception, which is associated with "mind." The former requires a state of disorder, that which is "savage," to exist if it is to effect its transformation. The latter can exist in itself, but requires the presence of a "harmonious" mind to be perceived. The aesthetic of order is thus established as simultaneously an act of transformation, an act of perception, and a state of mind.

It can also be a standard demanded of labor, however, and as the next several lines demonstrate, as a state of mind it is the unique domain of the ruling class; domination thus becomes a means of instilling order, and through order, beauty. The shift to the commanding mode can be seen immediately in "Let," which, imperative itself, also establishes the imperative as the route to order. "Let" implies a commanding relationship between the presumably British reader and the "Blacks" performing labor, and it is through such a commanding relationship that Grainger leaves behind the naturalized inevitability of the first two lines. It is clear, then, that the "Blacks" who "irregularly hoe" are part of the "savage face of things" that must be transformed by art, linking the commanding act and process of making "order." Furthermore, the assumption that without such a command the "Blacks" will hoe "irregularly" suggests that theirs are not minds captivated by order, racializing the entire aesthetics. The dyad of the transforming world of things and the realm of "mind" and perception, established in the opening couplet, is replicated again in the contrast between the embodied order of a guided laborer, depicted in the third line, and the mental labor of disembodied ordering in the fourth and fifth. The "line" by which the land is imaginatively ordered stands in here for abstract geometric thinking as a whole, a means by which the land can be understood through "consult[ation]" rather than simple labor. This dialogue with the land on the abstract level of geometric forms can be taken as the application of the "harmonious mind" "captivate[d]" by "order," and, in tandem with transformation of "savage" matter via command of labor into "art," it is the means of "beautify[ing] the whole" according to Grainger's aesthetics of order. Only through command is this harmonious mind able to act, however, not through direct labor; the third, fourth, and fifth lines clarify that the only means of achieving this perfect aesthetic ordering is through domination.